Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts. This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. How many science fiction works
feature spacecraft capable of planet hopping, interstellar travel, or even galaxy galloping?
Yet in our experience we know it takes several days travel to reach even the moon and years to
reach the nearest planets. Travel to the stars is presently unthinkable. In space opera, the writer
usually invokes some kind of faster than light drive which glosses over the basics of the special
theory of relativity. We asked physicist and science fiction writer Robert Forward how it may be
possible to travel faster than light. When you talk about going faster than light, really what you
want to do is get from here to there without traveling all the steps in between. If you can do
that, then you can go faster than light. There are two ways at least that I know to do that. One is to
find a space warp. You jump into the space warp, you go into a hyperspace, and then you come out of
another space warp somewhere else in our universe. And if you can do that in a time shorter than it
takes you to travel over the top line, then you've done that. And the amazing thing about it is the
Einstein General Theory of relativity has space warps in it. Going through a space warp is one way
to get around the speed of light limit. And what's the second way? Then the other way to go faster
and speed up light is to destroy the space between you and where you want to go. Now this space drive
theory was invented by a student of Roger Penrose. He's a scientific expert and relativist that works
with Hawking on gravitation. And he's working on a thing called twister theory. And in the twister
theory, the real universe is not what we see. That's only a reduced image of it. The real universe is
an eight-dimensional universe that's made up of twisters. The twisters not only make up all the
particles in the space and time that we live in, it even makes up the space and the time. It takes a
certain collection of twisters to make up a point in space. It takes another collection of
twisters to make up a point in time. This collection of twisters is a fairly uniform thing, and that's
why we see space as it is according to Penrose. Now we don't know whether the twister theory is
correct, but Roger is hoping that it will turn out to be an accurate method, I mean accurate theory for the
interest. So how does one build a faster than light drive based on the twister theory of Penrose and his
students? If you want the twister space too much, give it a real strong warp, then it's no longer
ordered well enough to make a piece of space or a piece of time. So if you take a piece of
twister space and you warp it badly, the space and the time that it used to make now disappears. It's
no longer there. So their version of a different kind of a faster than light drive is you take a
spacecraft up, you get it out in the wave in the planets and so forth, then you turn on the
twister warping machine in your spacecraft on the side parts Alpha Centauri and you just warp that
space so much that you warp that twister space so much that the space time between here and Alpha
Centauri disappears. And what you'll see if you're sitting in the spacecraft is that all of a sudden
Alpha Centauri just come right towards you and then pretty soon you look out one window, you see the
sun, you look out the other window, you'll see Alpha Centauri. Then the machine inside the spacecraft
unwarps the space but on the other side of the spacecraft and all that space now reappears between
the spacecraft and the sun, you watch the sun recede off another distance while you stay there
with Alpha Centauri. So that's another way to get there. You just get rid of the space between here
and there. This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. No other field has fans as distinctive and intense, some would
even say as fanatical, Science Fiction does. Every year there are hundreds of conventions
around the country, from small local affairs to the incredible world convention in which fans
gather. They come for various reasons of course, to socialize with like-minded people, to meet
science fiction and fantasy authors, to buy books at the dealer's tables. There's one particular
type of fan with a special, consuming interest, costuming and masquerade. Most conventions
therefore have a masquerade section, a contest for fans who have made and presented a costume
from some science fiction or fantasy work. The Science Fiction Radio Show spoke with
Teresa Patterson, a fan who has won numerous awards for her science fiction and fantasy
costuming. She says a few years ago she was hooked on Star Trek but do nothing about fandom.
But one day after Star Trek there was a big advertisement for a Star Trek convention in Dallas
and it was going to have some of the stars there and everything and I'd never heard of such a thing.
But it sounded like a lot of fun so we went down and then I ran into nearly 1500 to 2000 fans who
also liked Star Trek, who also had a reason for coming to Science Fiction and Fantasy and had been
touched by Star Trek because of this feeling they had and all of a sudden I had a family and a place
to belong and I've been an avid fan ever since going to as many conventions as I could and one
aspect of this convention was costuming and I'd always been sort of interested in theater and
that sort of thing but never really involved. But here were all these people who weren't really in
the theater and weren't performers but they had all these wonderful costumes and were going up and
doing the masquerades. The next time they had a convention I was ready and I had my first costume
it was a very poorly made mirror mirror costume from the Star Trek episode Mirror Mirror.
But it was a beginning and it was something and all of a sudden I was involved and I had a part
in a world where in my male life I didn't have much of anything that I really belonged to
and through fandom and science fiction and belonging to that world I eventually learned how
to belong in a normal world again and basically it changed my entire life. I actually even became
popular in high school which at the time that I started in fandom I would have thought that
popularity was something I would never see. So and then it grew from there I became a theater
and drama major at UTA and I now work as a professional singer and performer and do a lot of
costuming with that job and freelance costuming but my first love is still making characters come
alive on the stage at science fiction and fantasy conventions because I think that what I was searching
for at the time was a reality that I could fit into and I think that's what the other fans are
searching for and the masquerade gives me a chance to make that dream become a reality.
We asked her to give us an example of bringing a science fiction character to life through
costuming. One of our most successful costume skits that we designed and I had some other people
with me at the time we went to World Con in Boston and we had a young fellow who was a good friend
of mine and my little sister did a Star Wars get together but what they did was the lights
darkened and the Star Wars theme came up and all of a sudden Luke Skywalker came flying through the
air doing somersaults onto the stage stopped and did a one-handed handstand very precariously
balancing using the force to hold him up and then Yoda came slowly onto stage nodding wisely and
instructing him on the use of the force he didn't get it right the first time then he tried again
the second time and finally succeeded with a perfect one-handed handstand balancing with the
use of the force and then left up did a couple more flying leaps and somersaults in the middle
of the air across the stage and left standing ovation by 9000 screaming people who for them
Star Wars was alive we'll talk with Theresa Patterson about fans and costuming next time
this has been the science fiction radio show production of the permy and basin science fiction
association produced in conjunction with odessa college in odessa texas
coming up next is the science fiction radio show so stay with us
this is the science fiction radio show a commentary on science fiction and fantasy
and here are your hosts
this is david karson and daryl lane we're talking with threesa paterson
fan and award-winning costume designer Patterson believes that the best costumes are those that
make the science fiction or fantasy character come to life for the viewers therefore in addition
to constructing the costume itself she also creates a setting and sort of a brief script to
put the character in she takes us through one of her creations now i also have another one that has
been extremely successful it's called morgan lefay and the character basically i was sitting around
trying to think of what is a really way out character that's not all that well known but that
could command the stage and make that same kind of reality come about and it occurred to me that
very little has been done with the saucer is morgan lefay who's from the arthurian legend and who
was the one that eventually defeated merlin and i thought if i can make this character do a spell
on stage so that the audience really believes it that that would be an excellent kind of costume to
so i designed the costume and of course it's different than designing a costume for a
for a movie character or a television character because it was completely up to my imagination
what i wanted to do with it so i used a lot of reds and and blacks and lots of gold and to create
a total effect of color but somber evil color and made a very large headdress with lots of
sparkles on it to catch the light and designed it in such a way so that it would give the impression
of an evil sauceress who had a lot of power and was a ruler in her own right and designed the
cloak so that it would actually fold out into a half circle so that would look like bat wings on
the back the costume was beautiful but that's not enough what paterson had to come up with was
something for morgan lefay to do then she had to locate a soundtrack that would somehow convey the
evil and menace of the sorceress paterson did both of these things then she added a little extra to
the sound effects and then i added a soundtrack record which had thunder and lightning on it
and went into my handy dandy little stereo set in the middle of the living room bought a bunch of
patch cores from radio shacks so that the room looked like spaghetti's bill and patched it all
together and using a normal hand mic and a reverb effect from the speakers being on at the same time
as the recording managed to get an evil reverberating sound to the voice lightning and thunder in the
background this awesome evil music building and and flowing and a high climax and then fading out in
the distance so i had a wonderful soundtrack and if the mic failed i'd still be fine because i had it all on
tape
finally she describes the presentation of the character at a convention before a large audience
and the way the actual skit came off was something like this the stage would darken
and then you'd see a red glow moving up onto the stage and you'd see just the outline of this bizarre
golden mask and headdress and a red garbed woman holding the red globe and the music starts and
starts to build and all of a sudden the spell starts and then suddenly there's a burst of flame
from the red globe and then there's a spill builds and she starts summoning the darkness the room
gets darker for a moment and then there's another burst of flame and the room starts to lighten
just a little bit and the spell builds and builds until finally she banishes the light from her and
says darkness be gone and then blasts this huge shot of fire blue flame straight up into the sky
and the darkness is gone and then she tells you that she is morgan lefay and then demonstrates the
costume and shows the wide wings of the bat and slowly walks off as the thunder fades into the
distance again i got a standing ovation the costume has never not won a prize it has always been
first and second everywhere i've taken it and there are better costumes but it comes to life
and that's what the people are looking for is a way to bring their fantasies and their dreams
into reality so they can touch them so it's something they can really have a tangible experience from
more with teresa paterson next time
this has been the science fiction radio show production of the permean basin science fiction
association produced in conjunction with odessa college in odessa texas
um
you
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Darrel Lane and David Carson.
Teresa Patterson is a science fiction fantasy fan who was turned on by the idea of making
familiar characters from the field come to life for others.
She goes to science fiction conventions with carefully constructed costumes and colorful
skits.
She enters the masquerade or some costuming competition with her creations and has won
many awards.
Costuming is a fascinating part of science fiction fandom.
We observe that there must be some acting ability that goes along with it.
Of course, but actually I think there's a bit of actress or actor in almost everyone
who's into the fandom scene at all and even people who aren't.
It's just a matter of whether we can actually do something with it or not.
A lot of people just assume, well, that'll never happen.
I'll never get to do anything with it.
And they forget about that part of their personality.
I'm a little more stubborn.
I intend to do it professionally eventually.
And to some extent, I'm doing that now with my performing as a singer and dancer with
the singing telegram companies and as a model and so forth.
And I've been in two science fiction movies as an extra, Logan's Run and Laid of Heaven,
which both were a lot of fun.
But it doesn't take an actor or an actress to do these kind of things.
And I've seen a lot of really wonderful skits and costumes and performances pulled off by
people who had never even considered the idea of being professional actors or actresses.
They just want to make it real.
And that's all acting ever was, was just trying to make something real and recreate something.
It's just that what we do is a little different than your typical stage play.
But it should be no less entertaining and we're trying to create it so that it's no
less entertaining.
Patterson usually works with a group of friends in performing her mass grade skits.
Who wondered how newcomers took to costuming.
Do they become converts fairly quickly?
We don't have anyone who's ever met or joined our group that hasn't immediately ended up
in a costume.
Sometimes under protest the first time, but they always end up under a costume and then
they always want more and more costumes.
And the next thing you know, we've got a whole new set of costumers.
When we went to Boston, we took five people in four different costume skits.
These five people, I was the only one who'd ever been to a world com before.
Most of them had never even been to a major convention before.
All they knew was they wanted to do the masquerade.
They loved science fiction and fantasy and fandom and they wanted to do the masquerade.
And they had a lot of creativity and they were willing to listen to suggestions and we
all worked together.
And we came away with four awards.
People who nobody had ever heard of before, we went up there to the world con and won
four of the top awards.
Best presentation overall, first runner up for best presentation.
Star Wars special award prize and first runner up for best fantasy.
We asked Patterson how she taught herself to do the elaborate costuming she's doing now.
I still don't know what I'm doing now.
It's, I've learned a lot from other people and from lots of trial and error, mostly trial and
error.
I discovered fabric glue when I was in desperation and it works wonderfully on all kinds of things.
When I started costuming, I really didn't know anything about sewing at all.
The idea of making clothes was the farthest thing from my mind.
And it just happened that I needed a costume and I had to figure out how to create this
thing that you couldn't possibly buy in a store by its very nature.
And the first costumes were very much trial and error.
But since then I've learned a lot of shortcuts, shortcuts that an average seamstress would
probably never use because they learned all the rules and I didn't.
And I try to pass on those shortcuts and a lot of the major conventions, they have workshops
where they discuss costuming and shortcuts that other people have find and stage techniques.
And there are books and magazines out that cover costuming and make up and easy ways to do all
these things.
Any fan who's seen some of Theresa Patterson's work can't help but be impressed.
She's made many characters from fantasy and science fiction live.
We'll talk about some other aspects of fandom on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane. This will be our final show with Theresa Patterson,
Science Fiction Fan and Costume Designer. Patterson talks about the various types of
science fiction fans. And our listeners should keep in mind that in fan terminology,
fin is the plural of fan. There are actually several different level of fans. There are
new fin which are people who just discovered that oh you mean there's somebody else that
reads this stuff besides me. There are true fin who are the people who go to conventions
on a live and die situation and fandom is a way of life and will sell whatever they can sell at
the dealer's tables if they can make enough money to get back and forth between the conventions
and who literally the convention society is their social life. Then there are a whole scope of people
in between. There are what we call closet fans who are the people who read the books,
who watch the shows, who go to the movies, but who have absolutely no idea that there's any
kind of organization out there whatsoever. There are the slightly organized fans which are people
who realize that there is organization who maybe go to a con every now and then, who every now and
then get a chance to meet their favorite author, but who really aren't that much into the convention
scene. It's just something that they like and every now and then they like to express the fact that
they enjoy it. And then of course there are the professional fan which are people who through
their professions one way or the other have somehow gotten tied up with the science fiction or fantasy
genre and because they deal with it every day or part of every day and because they must like it
or they wouldn't deal with it to some extent. They're fan too.
Serious science fiction fans who attend conventions live in a weird sort of world with
its own activities and even its own vocabulary. Both these aspects of fandom are illustrated in
the word, folk singing. We asked Patterson to explain it to us. Well basically like any other,
when you take fandom as a microcosm of people and that this is their social life when they're at a
convention, you have to deal with the fact that social life includes entertainment. And if you're
into science fiction and fantasy and you're doing something special like a convention,
you don't want to go out and entertain yourself by going to the local bar or the local disco.
That's boring. You want to do something that's uniquely fandom. And so something that was developed
through fandom is a thing called folk singing. Folk singing is folk singing sort of. Basically,
folk singing is a creation of songs that are performed by one person or many person on or off
or on the same page. So in one song, it's a song that's written specifically for the audience of
science fiction and fantasy listeners. Patterson says there can be different kinds of folk singing
but that they all fulfill a need among science fiction fans. Now some of folk singing is very
simple. It simply involves taking a tune from a normal song and changing the words around to have
something to do with science fiction or fantasy. And usually those are funny and they're the kind
that you can get a lot of giggles off and everyone joins in.
But the more serious element is original songs that deal with very serious ideas like the
fact that man's finally reaching for space and the Columbia's here or the fact that
when are we really going to get to be dancing on the moon by the time it actually happens
I'll be too old and things like that.
And Filking is a whole type of folk singing strictly for fans.
And some fans don't like it because they don't like the taking of other people's music
and putting other lyrics to it.
But for most fans it's a wonderful outlet for getting to know other people and just
sit around at night when there's nothing else to do and sing songs and get a very close
type of camaraderie that you only get in some other kind of very close knit group.
Not all conventions have folk singing but the more intimate ones where it really is
a social life type situation do because it's a very big part of the social life.
Patterson's enthusiasm for science fiction and science fiction fandom is obvious and
infectious.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.